Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined again by Dr. Paul Eastwick. He's
professor of psychology at the University of California, Davis.
Uh, IN our previous conversation, we focused on his
latest book, Bonded by Evolution, The News. OF love
and connection. And today we're going to talk a
little bit more about it, expand on some of
the topics we explored in our last conversation, and
also perhaps tackle a few that we left out.
So Dr. Eastwick, welcome back to the show. It's
always a pleasure to have you on.
Yeah, I'm so excited to be back. Let's do
it.
OK, so, uh, as my first question, I mean,
last time we've already talked a little bit about
what in your book you told the evil script,
that is, I mean, the script that evolutionary psychologists
tend to associate with, uh, dating, uh, human dating
and mating. Uh, THERE'S three central pillars to it.
I mean, the first one is that, uh, we
have inherent mate value. The second one is. That
men and women have historically achieved reproductive success through
different avenues, and the third one is the distinction
between short term and long term forms of human
mating. I mean, would you like to tell us
more about each of them and how do you
tackle them and where do you think that perhaps
they fail or come up short when it comes
to understanding mating?
Yeah, yeah, that's, let's take each one. One at
a time. And I think what's useful to think
about with respect to these three ideas is both,
look, they're supported by certain elements of the science,
science that that really came into form in the
1990s. Um, AND all three. I think we've shown
in recent decades have had some real limitations. And
one of the reasons I wrote the book was
because these three ideas are very popular online and
are actually the source of a great many misconceptions
online about the way that relationships work. But let's
start with the scientific component of this, and then
maybe, maybe we'll get to some of the exaggerations
of these ideas that exist online later. So the
first one is about mate value, which refers to
the idea that some people have traits or attributes
that make them especially desirable as a romantic partner,
and other people don't have those traits and attributes.
I think when you look at the science, there's
two good pieces of evidence for this idea. The
first one. Is that people get feedback as they
go through life, as they have rejection experiences. This
is especially salient when we're young, and we internalize
those rejection experiences in a way that makes us
wary of future rejection and it changes how we
set our sights. So if you're somebody that historically,
maybe you would be rejected by a number of
the people that you. Interested in dating, you would
internalize something about your mate value, and that would
shape how you see the world. This is very
much a real thing that people experience. We internalize
those negative moments that we have when we're trying
to date. And a second good piece of evidence
for this idea is that in general, on average,
you see that couples, looking at existing couples, these
couples sort. On desirable characteristics like physical attractiveness. And
the reason that we think people sort on physical
attractiveness is, is not because physically attractive people live
near each other, right? We'd make that case for
something like income or SES. This is who you
meet, so this is who you end up marrying.
But for something like physical attractiveness, we think it's
a competitive process, such that when people are meeting
each other, if you're super hot. Many people are
gonna want to date you and that affords you
a level of selectivity. And so, that means that
on average, attractive people are gonna date other attractive
people. So, when it comes to mate value, we
can start with those two ideas. Those have been
pretty central to evolutionary psychology for a long time.
Um, I don't think those two ideas are wrong
necessarily, but I also think there are some limitations.
OK, I, I mean, but about that first pillar
then that you tackled there, let me just ask
you this. I mean, uh, about the inherent mate
value, uh, I mean, as because you were saying
that as people go through life and they get
rejected, they sort of internalize that there are these,
they have these features that because that perhaps make
them less appealing to members of the op. It's
sex and so on, but do you think that
that's simply something that people internalize just because through
their own experiences accidentally they got rejected by people
with particular traits, or that is there really an
inherent mate value that that that person holds for
Virtually everyone
of. Yeah, so I think this is indeed the
rub that a lot of what I'm describing here,
it applies pretty well to first impression contexts, especially
contexts where you're meeting strangers. I think that's where
these things are the most salient. And so, right,
if you really want to get a sense of
your quote unquote mate value, like go to the
club and start hitting on people and see how
well you do, and that'll, that'll tell you something.
But first impression contexts are critically, not the only
way that people meet each other and furthermore, are
evolutionarily kind of weird because we evolved in small
groups. You know, maybe you knew another like 50
people in your group, that was who you spent
time with, and that's all ages, all genders, etc.
And there might be a couple of other groups
nearby, but your whole social world is gonna be
150 people. So not many potential partners, but you
do have the luxury of getting to know those
folks over an extended period of time. So meeting
strangers, not something we would have been doing commonly
in our evolutionary past. So, do, do I think
the evidence is good that made value matters in
those contexts, but I think that's what people are
internalizing. How do I come across on a first
impression? That is different than how do I, how
would I come across as a mate in general,
how would I be with somebody if I'm in
a long-term relationship with them? And one of the
limitations of the science is that historically many of
the studies were conducted in, I mean, with people
like looking at photographs or maybe first impression settings.
When you look at the studies that track how
people feel about each other over time. You see
a pretty dramatic waning in the importance of mate
value, and where you really see this. Is that
people stop agreeing over time about who the desirable
and the undesirable people are. So yes, when people
first meet you, they will arrive at a pretty
strong, but actually far from perfect consensus about how
physically attractive you are, about how charismatic you are,
and how intelligent you are. But as folks get
to know you over time. Their agreement about these
different features of your desirability goes down. I think
that's evidence that the importance of mate value wanes,
that the presence, you know, the, the, the, the,
the, uh, how critical that trait is to mating,
uh, starts to die off as people get to
know each other, and it's replaced by all of
these idiosyncratic impressions that people have of each other.
And how about the second pillar? I mean that
men and women have historically achieved reproductive success through
different avenues and then of course from evolutionary psychologists
who work on mating, there's these very common ideas
about how, for example, uh, what men tend to
pay more attention to in women has to do
mostly with physical traits, with their appearance, with them,
with neotenous, uh, facial characteristics with them. See, um,
I mean, seeming young because that's, they're in their
fertile period and so on and so forth. And
when it comes to women, what they tend to
prefer in men is basically them, uh, having access
to resources, being successful, being ambitious. I mean, basically
being able to provide, right? I mean that, that's
in very simple terms, that's what we tend to
hear. I mean, is that really the case?
Yeah, so, you know, this is one of those
cases where it really depends on the methods. And
so, you know, through, through the 1990s into the
early part of this century. What people tended to
do when they attacked these questions is they tended
to ask people, you know, things like, hey, how
much do you desire attractiveness in a partner? How
much do you desire status or earning potential in
a partner? And when you ask questions like that,
this was true in the last century and it's
true in this century, you'll see gender differences. Men
say they care about attractiveness more than women, and
women say they care about earning potential and and
status and ambition and other related characteristics more than
men do. What we realized um a number of
years ago is that that's just one way of
capturing what people want in a partner, and I'd
argue when you use those approaches, you're capturing what
people say they want in a partner. If I
wanted to capture what people actually want in a
partner, I would design the study a little bit
differently, and so we would look instead at, hey,
let's say you're meeting a bunch of different people
who vary in how attractive they are, who vary
in their level of ambition. And I wanna see,
well, which folks do you like more or less?
I wanna see for you is ambition, for example,
a strong predictor of who you like. I would
call that a measure of actual liking for the
trait of ambition when you're meeting people face to
face. And what you tended to see, and, and
this was, you know, we first saw this in
speed dating, we've seen this in basically every design
that we could come up with that. Yeah, you'd
see that women indeed like the ambitious men a
little bit more than the men who were not
ambitious. But what you'd also see is that the
men tended to like the ambitious women a little
bit more than the not so ambitious women, and
that the extent to which ambition appealed to women
in that setting was just as strong as the
extent to which it appealed to men. Um, WE'D
see similar lack of gender differences when it comes
to physical attractiveness, and you really see this across
the board with, with most traits. The exceptions tend
to be in the realm of like bodily features,
um, which you sort of alluded to there. Um,
I actually don't know if I've seen. It done
uh with facial features, but certainly things like waist
to hip ratio, a little bit of evidence with
height, although, wow, that, that gender difference is smaller
than you might think. You need a lot of
people, if you, in your study, if you want
to detect a significant gender difference in the actual
appeal of height, but I, I do think it's
there. Uh, BUT generally speaking, um, when, when you
think about men's and women's preferences in this way,
it's a lot more in the way of similarities
than there are in differences. The differences are quite
small.
OK, and but when it comes to speed dating,
because I mean, I, I also think that speed
dating in terms of study design is better than
just self-reporting, but because it's that kind of context
where it's very fast and basically you're reacting almost
only to first. Impressions because you have very limited
time. I mean, to what extent can that translate
to a long term relationship success? I mean, the
what people report as being the traits that they
prefer in people they interact with in. Those kinds
of settings, does that really translate to long term
success, what they want in the long term?
Yeah, this is a great question, because indeed we
started with speed dating, but it was pretty clear
from that point forward, like, well, wait, we have
to test other kinds of designs too. So I'll,
I'll talk about uh a few other different ways
that we've approached this. One design. Um, WHERE you
can test the same question is, you kind of
get people to report on their crushes. So, we've
done this with folks who are undergraduates, and every
couple of weeks you check in with them and
you say, have you met anybody recently that you're
interested in? And then tell us about that person
and you can. You know, get ratings of physical
attractiveness of the people that they're into, etc. AND
track over time, hey, do you remain interested in
this person? Are you interested in forming a relationship
with this person, etc. Um, IN those kinds of
contexts, you can look at these gender differences in
the same sort of way. It's the same thing,
right? That, that equality like ambition, and that appeals
to women a little bit and it appeals to
men a little bit in their crushes. So that,
so we're not beyond first impressions, um, but we're
still not in the established relationship phase for the
most part. You know, when you, when you survey
people about their crushes, it's only like 15% turn
into actual established committed relationships. But we can also
start at the committed relationships phase and ask people
instead questions like, uh, how happy are you in
this relationship? Um, DO you want to remain committed
to this relationship and look at how physical attractiveness
and ambition predict those variables too. And once again,
we don't see any evidence of gender differences. Whether
it's my report of my partner's physical attractiveness, that
matters, but it matters the same for men and
women. And to get back to the mate value
discussion. You can also look at like, you know,
independent observers codings of my partner's physical attractiveness and
look to see, does that predict my marital satisfaction?
Does it matter that my partner is actually hot
for whether I want to stay in that relationship?
And the answer is no. It, it just really
doesn't matter at all. The effects of independently coded
attractiveness on a person's relationship satisfaction, it is basically
zero for both men and for women, very small
effects there. So, so across the board. No gender
differences. You, you certainly see differences in like the
overall magnitude of these effects. Consensually related physical attractiveness
will predict how much somebody is liked on a
first impression setting, not when they're in an established
relationship, but these things are not gender differentiated in
any reliable way.
How about um the third pillar and the distinction
that many evolutionary psychologists established between short-term and long-term
forms of mating and of, of course, they talk
about how uh preference or how mate preferences, at
least sometimes for men and women change depending on
where they're pursuing shorter more. Long term mating and
for example, in the case of women, they, they
talk about how if they're doing shorter mating, then
they prefer the sexier men. I mean, the men
with the uh the better physical traits and the
the bad boys and all of that. But if
they're going long term. And they prefer the ones
that from whom they expect more paternal investment, for
example, and them being more nurturing and so on
and so forth. So what do you make of
that? Yeah, this one's interesting, and this one I
think is, it's some of the confusion here is
really about terminology, but I think there's um. There
are other metaphors that are more helpful when it
comes to this distinction. So, are some relationships short
term and others are long term? Absolutely. But what
I think sometimes happens is that people confuse a
short term mating mindset with an initial attraction phase
of a relationship. Because when you're talking about short
term, long term as different modes of mating, like
I can do this one or I can do
that one. It implies a particular thing that I
think is very wrong, which is that when I
am short-term mating, I'm doing these attraction tactics, but
when I'm long-term mating, I'm doing these other attraction
tactics. I think the evidence for that is bad,
that there really isn't any. It would imply things
like. When I go to the club, I do
certain things to show off and land partners, and
those things would be less effective if I go
to church, right? Where I would be more likely
to find a long-term partner. There's no evidence for,
for any of that. I think a cleaner distinction,
and the one that is more consistent with the
evidence, is that there's a distinction between initial attraction
and getting to know somebody, and getting to know
them a little better and having a first hookup
experience, and then maybe forming a long-term relationship, that
it's a sequence that can fall apart at any
time. And so people who are interested in quote
unquote short-term mating, what they're doing is they're spending
a lot of time in that initial attraction phase,
and maybe they break those things off intentionally, or
maybe they're very popular and they capitalize on that
popularity. That's all great and that makes sense. But
it's very, very challenging and very, very rare for
people to initiate a long-term relationship without going through
that same initial attraction sequence. And the piece of
data that I often point to that I think
makes this case the most clearly. Is that look,
I think there's a tendency to think that short-term
relationships are about sexiness and long-term relationships are about
stability. But a funny thing happens as people get
to know each other, which is, as their interest
in this person is increasing and as they have
an initial sexual experience, it seems like if that
sexual experience is good, they want it to be
long term. If the sexual experience is like kind
of meh. That's what they want to be short
term. So I, I think about the short term,
long-term distinction. It's like better to think about it
is, I'm gonna maintain a short-term relationship if it's
somebody like I just kind of like, but I
don't see this going to any deeper. More, more
meaningful places and a long-term relationship has the sexiness
and the long-term potential. So it's more of a
sequence rather than two independent modes of approaching relationships.
But if someone has that kind of mentality where
they like to play the field, so to speak,
and try to keep things casual because they're like,
oh, OK, I don't really like commitment too much.
I like to see how things go with different.
People and then if I'm interested, I might commit
to someone, uh things like that. Does that have
any bearing on someone's long term relationship prospects or
all
right, yeah, yeah, it's a great question. So let
me talk about two components here. One is, let's
say what you were trying to do was suss
out the characteristics of the players. Because you wanted
to avoid ending up in a long-term relationship with
them because they'd be bad long-term relationship partners. I
don't know, maybe they'd cheat on you or maybe
they would just make you miserable for whatever reason.
So can we take features that are indicative of
short-term mating prowess and show that those same features
predict that if you get in a long-term relationship
with these folks, it's gonna go badly for you?
The answer is no. That all of the features
that we can identify that indicate that somebody is
attractive in the short term, they're pretty much irrelevant
to their long-term desirability. So, uh, I mean, I
already mentioned physical attractiveness, right? So that's, I think
a prime example. It is related to initial attractiveness.
It's just not related to long-term desirability. Um. Other
uh qualities like include things like, you know, somebody
who's like very confident and charismatic. Yeah, that predicts
that they'll be initially attractive. That's not a bad
sign in the long run, it's no sign in
the long run, it's just uncorrelated with, you know,
whether somebody is gonna make you a happy or
an unhappy relationship partner. If one's question instead was,
hey, I as a short-term mator. I would like
to do things that make it so that as
I'm like hooking up with a bunch of different
people, um, I continue that lifestyle rather than end
up in a long-term relationship. This is the version
that I think is more plausible, that some people
are capable of. Um, uh, PUTTING the brakes on
things, they have mechanisms in place that limit their
emotional attachment to people, and that allows them to,
to keep having a short-term lifestyle. I, I think
this is plausible. Although even this is going to
be far from a foolproof approach, and that what
often happens is that people are enjoying their short-term
lifestyle, and then they meet somebody and oops, they
clicked with them, and oops, they. Found themselves attaching
to that person, and now they have a long-term
relationship. So I think if you, if you spend
enough time meeting and hooking up with enough people,
there's a very good chance that you'll end up
falling for some of them. But do I think
that some people are capable of putting up a
certain set of guard rails and walls that prevent
that from happening? Yes, I do think that's plausible.
And that's about as far as you can push
the short-term, long-term distinction in my book.
Well, let me just say that earlier when you
said that, oh, if you're looking to avoid the
players because they might make your life miserable, and
I think that we'll probably come back to this
topic later, but I mean what I imagine that
one of the ways they can make your life
miserable is probably because many of those players might
score higher than the general population in dark triad.
BECAUSE I mean, people who score high on narcissism,
psychopathy, Machiavellianism, many of them are impulsive and some
of them are hypersexual and they like just playing
people into having sexual relationships with them, but then
because of those same traits, at least in the
medium to long term, they make your life miserable.
That is an excellent point, and. And what I'm
gonna say next is, it does not really dispute
that point, but it's like additional context for thinking
about traits in all of these different relationship contexts.
But generally speaking, it is far, far easier if
you're using traits to identify who's attractive in initial
attraction settings or who's a good short-term partner. Than
it is to use traits to figure out who
is gonna be a good partner in the long
term. It's just a harder task. In other words,
if all I had at my disposal was a
set of traits about a whole bunch of people,
and I just wanted to predict who was liked
here, initial attraction, and who was liked here, long-term
relationships. My models are going to do much, much
better in the first context than the second, and
this gets to some machine learning studies that my
colleague Samantha Joel has done. And, and it's really
interesting to look at because it, the, the study
design is almost identical. It's just in one case,
it's speed dating, using all the traits that people
self-report to predict how desirable they are. And then
you do it in long-term relationships, but it's the
same thing. You're gonna take all the traits that
people self-report and use that to predict how happy
their partners are with them. And in one case,
your models will account for like 25% of the
variance, and in that second case, it's 5%. So
it's a really big difference. So yeah, like long-term
relationships, narcissism is not great. Emotional instability is not
great, Machiavellianism, is not great, but it's a harder
task long-term. And the reason why, and maybe we'll
get into this a little bit more, is that
because Long-term relationships are these constructed entities that what
starts to matter more are your traits as I
experience them with you, which can differ from what
your traits are when you're with everybody else, which
is generally what people are self-reporting. So, so that's
the trickiness. So everything you said is correct, but
there is a real limit to how much you
can use traits to predict how desirable people are
long term.
Right. How about research done on mate preferences on
dating apps? I mean, because there's many criticisms of
that kind of relationship. I mean I've heard criticisms
from feminists, I've heard criticisms from sociologists, for example,
I mean feminists, just to give an example, many
times refer to the fact that, oh yeah, why
would women er swipe. Right, most of the time
if there's an inherent danger for them as women
to go out on the street and meet a
complete stranger that might even be tricking them or
catfishing them or something like that. So I mean
the 80/20 thing is just silly. It's just silly
to think is realistic because of that. I mean
that's just one kind of criticism, but what do
you mean that?
Yeah, I mean, I think, I think people who
are studying dating apps for the sake of studying
dating apps, uh, I think this is very valuable
because people use dating apps and we need to
understand what people are doing and the mental processes
involved. Uh, I would be hard pressed to come
up with a form of dating. And we're now
we're talking about like, what are you doing when
swiping? So we're not even concerned about what happens
when you ultimately meet face to face. I'd be
hard pressed to come up with a context that's
Stranger, more unusual, more irrelevant to the way that
we evolved. I mean, looking at pictures, having a,
you know, 3 2nd impression of somebody before you
swipe one way or the other, this is telling
us how we approach these highly produced, um, highly
unusual, very modern day stimuli, but I don't think
it tells us much about our evolved architecture. And
that's, and I think this is actually consistent. With
the feminist criticism that you articulate, because we're not
used to, I wouldn't say we're, we are used
to it. We didn't evolve to be in a
context where we were surrounded by this many strangers,
and with this level of anonymity, yeah, it can
feel very dangerous for a lot of people and
maybe especially a lot of women. So, you bring
a mindset to the dating apps that to me
reflect our modern emphasis on hitting on strangers, trying
to chat up strangers, trying to impress strangers, as
opposed to the context that I think is more
evolutionary relevance, which is how did you navigate small
groups and the social networks within those groups. Those
people should be less scary on average, not completely
safe, of course. But far less scary because people
know each other, there's accountability, and you're likely to
have a lot of information about these people, and
some of these folks are gonna appeal to you,
and some of them are not. So, I think
studying dating apps for the sake of studying dating
apps is great. Studying them to, to uncover some
truth about the human mating condition, I'm, I'm pretty
skeptical.
Yeah, so I want to address some worries that
people have and that I also have about evolutionary
psychology, how it is presented publicly, how it is
presented on the internet specifically, and whether it might
go associated with certain ideas that are not. Really
that good. So do you think that ideas that
stem from mainstream evolutionary psychology on mating, mate preferences
and all of that might sometimes get amplified? I
mean that even evolutionary psychologists themselves on the internet
might amplify them and then Uh, and that's not
their fault necessarily, but sometimes even the manosphere might
pick up, might pick up on them and exaggerate
them even further, and that might contribute, for example,
to the beliefs that incels and other men who
have little to no mating success for whatever reason
that they are doomed and also the kind of
misogynistic ideas that they tend to associate with women.
I think that's all correct. I agree with you
too, like, like this isn't unique to evolutionary psychology,
exactly. There's all sorts of forms of science that
when they reach the public, get spun out in
various nasty or unfortunate ways. People who over extrapolate
from various findings. I mean, you can find this
in like the behavioral economic space. You can find
this in the nutrition space. I mean, this happens
a lot. You know, when I realized, you know,
maybe 10 years ago, that this was happening, exactly
what you described, with the branch of research that
I knew, that was when my attitude started to
change a little bit. Just in the sense that
I realized like, oh wait a minute, like, I,
I used to think it was mostly fine and
fun for, you know, you publish in academic journals,
you have these academic debates, and that's great. I
wasn't so concerned about, oh, that people don't know.
That the gender differences and mate preferences actually haven't
held up all that well, and people don't know
that mate value is really primarily about initial impression
context, and its effect certainly is greatly reduced as
people get to know each other, but when I
realized that, like just how these ideas had inspired
a virulent strain of misogyny, that that was what
changed my approach to talking about some of this
stuff. Um, A lot of the ideas in the
manosphere, in cell culture, a lot of their ideas
about evolutionary psychology are flat out incorrect, but look,
sometimes they're channeling the science, they're just doing it
in a crude way. Now, again, I think most
of the ideas in this space are incorrect, that
they, that they have specifically taken pieces of evolutionary
psychology that have held up badly. And and that's
really what I wanted to write about, what I
wanted to emphasize is like a lot of these
components haven't held up well and we've talked about
them already. Um, BUT, but I also feel compelled
to point out too, like, yeah, this is a
natural risk that happens at the interface of science
and, and public disclosure, and, and no branch of
science that I'm aware of is exempt from this.
Right, and I mean what I'm trying also to
point out is the fact that for example, I'm
not going to name names here, but unfortunately it's
not that uncommon for you to find, particularly on
social media, well established evolutionary psychologists who work on
mating even themselves using terms like High value man,
high value woman, low value man, low value woman,
uh, I mean the, the obsession, the obsession with
hypergamy in the case of women and all of
that and talking about, uh, for example, certain men
as losers, certain women as the B word or
the W word or something. So I, I, I
mean, I find that really unfortunate because I mean,
uh, uh, like you, I've been. I, I mean,
very, I, I, I mean, I've distanced myself a
lot when it comes to the evolutionary psychology of
mating specifically. There are many other aspects of evolutionary
psychology that I, that I find great and all
of that. It's just mating itself that has been
a lot. But, but, but then, I mean, it's
really hard to deny that there are a few
people. Out there with lots of following on social
media who are evolutionary psychologists and push those kinds
of ideas. I mean that's undeniable.
Yeah, yeah, it's uh, it's not my favorite, my,
you know, like my informal impression is that people
loosen up online. They, they let those kinds of
opinions fly. Uh, Especially to the extent that they're
not so bound by the scientific rules and decorum
anymore, if that makes any sense. So, once you've
disengaged a bit from the scientific process, people, people
tend to, uh, to let their true feelings fly
online. And that, um, that is, I think, one
of these unfortunate. Things that, that, that social media
and other, you know, other similar platforms uh have,
have put out there. So yeah, this is upsetting.
I, I, I wanna point out to you that
you, you, you will see evolutionary psychologists who I'll
say like are like practicing researchers who are also
out here saying like what, what the incels are
saying is absolute garbage and isn't. Well supported. Dan
Conroy Bee is one of them. He's written op-eds
about this. So, so there's, there's a lot of
people who are concerned about this as well. Um,
BUT, but yes, what, what you're saying is also
absolutely the case. And I think I even quote,
uh, one or two of them in the book.
Yeah, I mean, also because there are a few
of them. I, I mean, of course this is,
I think it's fair to say that it's a
small number of people, but with a big, with
big platforms who, who even also associate themselves with
the man whore. Itself with anti-trends ideas, with far
right ideas with eugenics, and I mean at a
certain point it's just a complete mess and then
to also associate the evolutionary psychology of mating with
all of those ideas. Yeah, I think he's very,
very
dangerous. Yeah, well, now let me, let me point
out two lighter versions of what you're talking about
that I think apply more broadly because there is
a real spectrum here. You, you're right that some
people are out here waving the incel and the
manosphere flag happily, you know, people who were, uh,
scientists or former scientists. But, but, but here's a
couple wrinkles here. I think a lot of people.
Harbor incorrect ideas about evolution and particularly about the
nature of biological determinism. My guess is you would
get any evolutionary, any practicing evolutionary psychologist to come
on here and say, I don't believe in biological
determinism and. Uh, I would believe that person, that
they don't think that, you know, that our genes
lead necessarily to certain outcomes, OK? That, that, that
applies to rarer genetic disorders where, you know, you
have like one gene and then you have the
disease, like cystic fibrosis. But, but for the most
part, we know that's not how psychological traits work.
But They will also say things like, well, because
there's a an innate genetic evolved propensity for, uh,
let's say men to be interested in casual sex.
Therefore, it's hard to change. And what I think
they don't realize is that that's just a lighter
form of biological determinism. It's the same idea, just
expressed in probabilistic terms, um. That idea that biological
things are harder to change, that's like a human
bias that we have. There's actually, there's no, you
can't like declare that that's true across the board.
I mean, it depends on the phenomenon, it depends
on a million other things. There are many things
that are purely learned, that are very, very hard
to change. So knowing that something is evolved or
not, does not mean it's hard to change and
the inverse logic is also not true. So I
think that's an example. Of some of the messages
that we talk about and we accidentally reinforce some
of these ideas. And I think, like progressives and
liberals like me, that a lot of times the
reason they don't like evolutionary psychology is because they
think the same thing. They think that if, if
I were to say, if I were to admit
that this thing has evolved, that would mean that
I that it can't be changed, and that sucks.
I like, I don't want that to be true,
but, but all of this is philosophically bankrupt. The,
the idea that biological things mean harder to change.
That you gotta, you gotta take each phenomenon on
its merits. Can we change men's sexual desire for
whether it's like young women or they're interested in
casual sex? My guess is yes, I could count
on one hand the number of studies that have
tried to do this even. So, I, I think
this is a case where our, it's like our
philosophy of the thing is really impoverished and then
we accidentally go out there and say dumb things.
No, you, you know, that aspect that you mentioned
about the philosophical impoverishment, it's very interesting because it
reminded me of the, um, the position that many
people, I mean this is not just evolutionary psychologists,
it's behavioral scientists more generally, but that are not
very well philosophically informed, that very strong. Belief that
they have of determinism against free will because I
mean it's it's very convenient for them to, for
free will to not exist at all because it
makes their life and their predictions simpler.
Yeah, I, I think that's right. And, and, you
know, another important physic uh philosophical idea that's worth
unpacking is this idea that as scientists, we are
like these objective sages of truth and we are
unbiased. Yeah. Um. And I, I also think we,
we gotta discard that idea too. That what it
means to be a scientist is you agree to
play by a certain set of rules, and we
learned a lot in the last decade about how
our rules were screwed up, and a lot of
the studies didn't mean what we think they mean.
OK, but we're, we're all trying to understand the
rules and that you agree when you play by
the rules that the data are the data. Now,
what you do. WITH those data, what are the
findings you put more versus less weight on? How
do you combine the pieces? What is the story
that you tell that connects all the threads? Of
course, that is informed by who you are as
a person. That is informed by your life experiences,
your attitudes, your preferences, your political leanings. Of course
it is. So, do I think that the narrative
that came out of F Psych in the 90s
was informed by those practitioners and the way they
saw the world? Of course, it was. And I'm
not going to apologize that my philosophical worldview is
different, but I have to work with the same
pieces. I have to work with the same, uh,
the same bits of data. We only fail as
scientists when We, you know, just like forget to
incorporate the various components. We, we have to all
work with the same puzzle pieces here, but of
course we're gonna assemble things differently. So, so this
idea that like, oh, like, like, you know, we
You know, the folks who are speaking to you
the hard truths about biological determinism, like they're the
real wise objective sages, and the rest of you
are just coping, like, get out of town. We're
all people here trying to assemble things using our
own experiences and our own worldviews.
Mhm. OK, so allow me to be bold here.
I'm going to present you with a hypothesis that
I've been thinking about for the past 4 years.
I mean, I, I'm not even sure if I
would call it a hypothesis because I don't think
it's probably, it's not even a proper scientific hypothesis.
It's more of a strong intuition, but, and let
me hear your thoughts. So do you think that
perhaps And some of these evolutionary psychologists who promote
the kinds of ideas about mating that you criticize
and debunk in your book find them appealing. I
mean that men tend to have these preferences, women
tend to have those preferences, and all of that
is, as you said, semi-deterministic. Do you think that
behind that could be that they have some specific
psychological traits that make those ideas appealing to them.
Like, for example, they might score high on sociosexuality
and perhaps they also might score high on dark
triad traits, and then They like to, for example,
they're interested, they are interested in uh sort of
figuring out how the minds of men and women
work to then sort of manipulate them into having
relationships with them.
Yeah, I, you know, I don't, I don't know,
um, and I, it's, it's like I don't know
enough of them personally. That I could make a
confident judgment along these lines. But, but to speak
to the broader phenomenon of research, I definitely think
that's a thing. And, and look, I'll just turn
the lens around on myself. Like one of the
reasons. That I resisted the narrative of evolutionary psychology.
What it was telling us about human mating in
the 90s and in the 0s was that it
didn't really fit with my experiences. That's not to
say I didn't have rejection experiences. I absolutely I
did. And that's not to say that I couldn't
look around and see gender differences. I absolutely could.
But on many of the components, I was like,
I didn't feel the same kind of dog eat
dog competitiveness, the ruthlessness between men and women that
that I'd often see depicted there. I was more
taken with ideas about attachment and pair bonding, because
honestly, that was a lot of what I experienced
as an older adolescent and as a young man.
So, I think it's very plausible that the folks
who constructed these earlier narratives had life experiences that
led them to put the pieces together in that
particular way. Um, SO, so that's like, I feel
super comfortable saying that, and, and I think like,
I, I, I find that point, um, uh, I
think. Like I think we treat that point as
more controversial than it needs to be. The scientists
are humans and we, we are humans who agree
to play by a certain set of rules, and
those structures and those institutions are really, really important.
And that's what separates science from just kind of
garden variety dispensing advice. Uh, BUT, but we are
definitely, definitely people who have had life experiences, we
have traits and it shapes how we, how we
do things.
Yeah. So, uh, I mean, let me ask you
a different kind of question now. Uh, uh, I
mean, when we have this very common idea and
it is also propagated by, uh, evolutionary psychology when
it comes to mating, that. I mean, we should
learn about or know what men in general or
women in general or the average man or the
average woman wants in a partner. I mean, don't
you think that perhaps a better question that people
should ask themselves is, What does a man or
woman that I want as a partner wants in
a partner? Don't you think that would be a
better,
yeah, so like, like the, a specific, do you
mean like a specific person that I'm interested in
or a specific kind of person that I'm interested
in?
Uh, I, I, I, I mean, OK, so perhaps
I have this general idea of the traits that
I tend to prefer in a partner, right? And
then, I mean, it would be more useful to
think, OK, so a person like that, what, what
does, what does she tend to prefer in a
partner?
I like, so, um, yeah, where I definitely think
you're onto something here is in the space of
Like the experiences that we have with live human
living and breathing members of our preferred gender, that
those experiences are, and I think should be very
important in shaping how we go about presenting ourselves,
what we end up doing when we're interested in
forming a relationship. Um, What I like to point
to is the research on adolescence showing that the
more these are heterosexual adolescents, OK, and the more,
uh, other gender friends that they have, so the
more if you're a man who's interested in dating
women, the more women friends you have, the likelier
you are in the coming 6 months, 12 years,
the more likely you are to be dating somebody.
And that same thing is true for women as
well, right? So, mixed gender networks are good predictors
over time of whether or not you will form
a relationship. Uh, I think what you're articulating here
is probably a big part of that, that what
you're doing when you're spending time with mixed gender
friends, like, yeah, sometimes you will end up forming
a relationship with them, but what you're oftentimes doing
is you're learning. It's like, if you're a guy,
you're learning about what women like, and I, and
I, and yes, in terms of traits, but boy,
I think about it more in terms of specific
behaviors. Like, maybe you get a little practice, I
don't know, like listening. And, and if you don't
listen well, your friends might correct you and give
you some feedback that you're not doing it very
well. And if these are friends that you're motivated
to keep, then maybe you'll try a little harder
next time. This is good, right? It is good.
To get negative feedback and then to change our
behavior so that we can become valuable, likable members
of a group. I think that's often what's going
on and why you see these network effects among
adolescents. So, so, so yes, where I really like
this idea is that, look, if you're spending time
with people that you kind of like, and, and
maybe you want to date some of them, but
maybe you just think they're cool and fun to
hang out with. By spending time with them, learning
those norms, becoming valuable to that group, getting that
feedback, internalizing it, what ends up happening is that
probably these folks are gonna introduce you to some
other similar like-minded folks, and that's where you're gonna
hit it off. So I do think that process
is probably very important, especially for younger folks.
Yeah, what do you make of recent data from
several countries, but particularly the US, that it apparently
shows that younger people are losing their virginity later
in life, going without sex? I mean, the percentage
of people apparently that report that in the past
year they haven't had sex at all. I mean,
the percentage is going up apparently, and That are
also not in relationships. I mean, what do you
make of uh those kind of data, does that
worry you or not?
It, it certainly worries me. I think the, the
devil is in the details for how this is
happening, and, and look, this is, I mean, as
you alluded to, yes, it's happening in the US,
but it's happening in many places throughout the world,
so we need to look broadly at what would
be worldwide causes here. Um, It seems to me
that the most likely thing that's happening is that
people are delaying the developmental process of dating, forming
relationships, having sex for the first time, and ultimately
forming a long-term committed relationship. So if you, if
you move the age window for when these things
are happening, and, and that age window has actually
been moving for a long time in some ways,
I mean, the age of marriage has been going
up and up and up, uh, for, you know,
getting close to 100 years now. Um. So I
think we're seeing that happening now with dating and
sex too. Um So I can do a glass
half full, glass half empty on this. I mean,
the glass half full component is like, well, you
know, I think young folks got the message that
they need to work really hard and put their
efforts into, you know, uh, building out their education,
building out their careers, and so they're delaying forming
relationships. Um, IF that means that eventually they'll do
these things, then I see less reason to worry.
But I can also very easily make the glass
half empty case, which is that these folks just
aren't going out in the way that they used
to, and that what has actually happened is that
socializing in person, which used to be kind of
random, kind of chy, you don't really know who
you're going to be spending time with. Sometimes you
have bad experiences. But it's all been replaced by
something more curated, something more electronic, something more online,
and maybe those involve experiences with real people or
sometimes maybe they don't involve experiences with real people.
This part makes me nervous, and, and the stat
that worries me the most is, is actually not
the like, like rising age of first sex or
even the lowering percentage of folks in relationships. The
stat that worries me the most is when you
ask high schoolers. How many times did you go
out and hang out with friends this week that
from when I was a kid, that number has
dropped by 50%. That's concerning. That means that like
high school kids aren't just like hanging out and
spending time together socializing. Because I think the evidence
is pretty consistent with the idea that most of
what we learn about dating and relationship formation happens
in casual networks with acquaintances and friends. I, I
worry less about like, oh my God, these guys
have never approached a woman at a bar. Approaching
a woman at a bar is weird to get
a relationship. People are good at that, go nuts.
I, I support you. Many people will not be
good at that. You don't have to do that,
have friends instead. But if people aren't having friends,
that's the part that really worries me.
OK, so perhaps the part that is even more
worrying here would be loneliness.
Yes, yes, exactly. If loneliness is tied to lack
of in-person socializing, look, The internet and all of
our devices, they do in some ways help us
feel more connected. I get to text all the
time with my 4 really good friends from high
school. How awesome is that? That would not have
existed. We would have been writing letters, you know,
40 years ago. What a pain. I love that
this texting technology exists, but it is replacing in-person
gatherings, especially among young folks who could be hanging
out in person, but are instead. Uh, CHOOSING not
to, uh, and especially if that is feeding into
our, uh, crisis of loneliness, that's the big problem
as I see it.
OK, so look, I, I don't know uh what
are your thoughts on this, but I, I've been,
I've been, I've been thinking for a while about
er how this might be related, at least to
a great extent to economics and our economic situation.
And I'm going, I'm, I'm going to tell you
why I think that and then I want to
hear your thoughts. I mean, uh uh, I mean,
the reason why I think this is that, I
mean, of course it can just be a correlation.
It can just be a coincidence, but I mean
it's too important an event to just be a
coincidence. It's, it's like um the, the 2010s after
the 2008 economic crisis was when people started reporting
feeling more and more lonely and those data about
people not being in romantic relations. Res, not having
close friends and all of that started becoming more
and more worrying and all of that. I, I,
I mean, I think that it has a lot
to do with the fact that uh in uh
um I mean one point would be the way
we have organized our societies in the sense that
there's more and more people living in cities and
cities. I mean, unfortunately, there's less and less good
spaces to meet people at least. Without, without having
to spend any money, you know, just going out
and meeting people without having to spend any money.
And then also, I mean, another thing that I
really think a lot about is how in the
early 1990s, in the early 19990s, there was a
big economic crash in Japan and the immediate, immediately,
the, the, in the immediate aftermath was when. Uh,
FERTILITY rates started dropping, romantic relationships started dropping, marriages
and all of that. So I really do think
that, uh, I mean, bad economic prospects really affect
people's ability to think long term when it comes
to forming romantic relationships, to marry, to have kids
and all of that, just because, uh, I mean.
The economic conditions are not there to do that.
And, and also, and also, OK, so, uh, comment
on that and then I, I'm going to add
another point.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean, I think up and
down the line you see these sorts of effects
and, and Robert Putnam was on this, uh, you
know, 25 years ago pointing out like, you know,
these, these spaces where people could casually get together
are going away, and you, you indeed see. When
you look at like who's got close friends these
days, it's declined since the 90s, but it's really
declined among folks of lower SES. And so I,
I definitely see all of these components as related,
because if you don't have close friends, that means
you're probably not hanging out with folks in person,
and to my mind, that's the main engine of
relationship formation, is spending time with people face to
face. Um, IF, if folks are opting out of
that, that is going to make it harder for
many people. Can, uh, these sort of knock-on SES
effects have, have consequences down the line too, right?
People delaying marriage and delaying having kids until they
feel like they're financially stable. Yes. Um, THE, the
one that I worry about the least is I
think the one that gets the most airtime, which
is the concern that because men are now not
measuring up to women in terms of their level
of education, that those men don't seem like viable
partners. Uh, LOOK, uh, you know, education and job
prospects are good on average. They're good in men
and they're good in women. I would very much
like to help these men, but I would just
like to start with the simpler solution of, let's
get folks out there again. And in a lot
of urban spaces, you're absolutely right. What you see
when you go out are couples and groups of
women, right? The, the, the groups of men. I,
I don't know, I, this is maybe a little
informal, but I don't get the sense that they're
out there in the world, in the way that
I remember 25 years ago. So that that's, that's
where I would start intervening.
Yeah, and then the other point that I wanted
to bring, to bring up was, I mean, I
also think that Uh, uh, we've been instilling too
much, particularly into young men, these outdated ideas about
traditional gender roles, and that's probably why many Gen
Z men are turning more and more to the
right and finding it harder to establish relationships with
women, is that they just have this sort of,
uh, what in this context are unrealistic expectations. EXPECTATIONS
about being the main provider and about being able
to provide uh by themselves, women with a home
with kids and sustain all of that by themselves.
I mean, I, I, I think that really hurts
men also because that's unrealistic in the present context.
And, and then that's also again, since people have
been spending so much time at home, perhaps in
part for the. Reasons that I mentioned before, I
mean, they go online and then it gets even
further reinforced by manosphere content on the internet, which
is just pushed onto them because that's what the
algorithm favors because it's the more outrageous content out
there. So, you know, I think that all of
that influences people, particularly young men, negatively.
Yeah, no, I'm totally with you there. I think.
A lot of men would probably be surprised to
discover that some of the most uh appealing attributes
that they can exhibit when they're actually meeting other
women face to face would be things like, you
know, I mean, yes, uh, it, it is helpful
in initial attraction settings to be physically attractive, but
you know what else is really good? Being responsive,
just seeming dependable, being. Funny, being a good listener
and being supportive and also learning how to celebrate
somebody else's successes. These are things that you can
practice in groups of friends and acquaintances. You don't
have to have a romantic partner to be able
to do these things. This is, this is why.
Um, SPENDING time, you know, and, and this for,
for adolescents, right, that like the older adolescents, I,
I really hope that they're like, yeah, old man,
we know this. I really hope that that's the
case, and that I'm not telling you something that's
new to you, but you got to spend time
socializing with people of your preferred gender, and you
gotta, you gotta take that feedback when you get
it, and you gotta use that to grow and
change. I absolutely did. I remember being 18 years
old, hanging out in this group of like mixed
gender friends, and sometimes the women in that group
would let me have it for doing one thing
or the other that was insensitive or stupid or
kind of boneheaded or whatever. And you take that
feedback and you grow from it, and it helps
make you a better person, and ultimately helps you
more, makes it so you're more likely to find
relationships down the line. You, you, you gotta do
this, you gotta do the work.
So since earlier we were talking about some of
the negative ideas out there that people can associate
evolutionary psychology with or some evolutionary psychologists even willingly
associate themselves with. Do you think that another thing
that There's a risk that evolutionary psychology might reinforce
if we approach mating in the more, I mean,
traditional kind of way that evolutionary psychology has approached
it is that it can reinforce traditional gender roles.
I think it can. I think it doesn't have
to. And one of the aspects of evolutionary psychology
that I think, you know, I can frame it
as either an ongoing disappointment or as an opportunity
for growth is like, where are the experiments where
we're trying to change these things. Where are the
experiments where we're trying to push around people's ideologies
about like what's good in a partner or what
makes you jealous or whether you're thinking about somebody
in terms of casual sex or a long-term relationships.
Um, IT, it's actually not a discipline that stresses
those kind of, uh, like intervention-minded experimental manipulations. Um,
THE, Um, ungenerous interpretation is the light biological determinism
stuff that I was getting at earlier that, uh,
we, but we kind of think it evolved, then
hard to change, so why are we gonna try
to be changing these things? That's an ungenerous interpretation,
but it also just could be because, you know,
that's like we haven't gotten around to it yet.
I would like to see us get around to
it. I mean, that's actually some of the studies
that Uh, that I'm doing with some of my
honor students these days is we're trying to understand
like, well, OK, when people read about these biological
explanations for things, um, why is it that they
go to these more automatic explanations? And are there
additional bits of context that we can give them?
That help reduce that influence. So, I, I think,
I think there, there, there are real opportunities here
to, um, to, to be evolutionarily-minded scholars and progressive
at the same time.
Yeah, OK, so I mean just to wrap up
the conversation because we've, you've already mentioned there are
some things that particularly men can do to put
themselves more out there and to interact with more
women and to feel more comfortable interacting with women.
And all of that. I mean, I, I have
these two kinds of ideas and sometimes I even
give them as advice and I would like to
hear your thoughts on that. So the, the first
one is that I tell them that they should
try to, uh, if they like those kinds of
activities, of course, I, I mean, they should try
activities. Where there's lots of women there participating. I
mean, if you're a nerd, if you're a nerd
like me, go to a book club or something
like
that.
If, if you like sports, I mean, try yoga
or try Pilates or something like that. I mean,
because there's lots of women there. And the, and
the other thing is, Uh, I mean, if you're
really interested in trying to find a new partner
and if you have female friends, I mean, just
do the things that people used to do traditionally.
Just go up to one of your girlfriends and
ask her, uh, uh look, uh, I, I'm interested
in interested in uh getting into. When your relationship,
do you have any girlfriends that are available? Yeah,
I mean, because, I mean, because they, they, if
they have one, then it's already easier for you
to get into contact with them because they're already
giving you their stamp in a sense.
That's right. That's right. I mean, I think that
the. You know, the best wingman is a close
friend, and maybe the best wingman of all, the
number one wingman is gonna be somebody of your
preferred gender, who can vouch for you. I think
the, like, the, the direct connection route, like, do
you have any friends, uh, look, that can be
effective, um, but sometimes people are, are nervous about
that because then they feel like they're playing too
direct a role. There are like lighter versions of
the thing that are just like, um, Uh, she's
like, you should come to this party with me
this weekend. There's gonna be like 8 other people
there. I think 2 or 3 of them are
single. I'll try to make sure I can facilitate
you having a conversation with them. And then let
it go from there. So they're not like, like
you don't need, I mean, you can, I mean,
if your friend's like, I'm gonna set you up,
who do you want me to set you up
with? Awesome. Take them up on that. But if
they're not, there are, there's, there's lighter asks, right?
There's like simple, hey, come with me to event
X, Y, Z. I mean, what, what I would,
what I would really do is like, You've got,
you know, your guy, you got this woman who's
a friend. The best thing she could do is
like join an improv class with you, OK? Boy,
that feels like a good bet, because you know
what you do in improv classes, you like, you
get very vulnerable, and you, you take the walls
down. I mean, these things can be really conducive
to forming relationships. Acting isn't your. You know, joined
some silly intramural sports thing. I did kickball, you
know, when, when I was in my 20s, and
what a fascinating milieu of folks. It was like
200 people, maybe 80 of them would get together
regularly at the bars afterwards. It was, kickball was
really an excuse to like, get together in this
big group and play, play drinking games. And people
from all like different walks of life, different SES
all getting along and getting to know each other
over time. So having a wingman in a situation
like that, where you're gonna meet people on repeated
occasions, these seem like winning approaches to me.
OK, so, I, I mean, these two different pieces
of advice, you think they're good.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. This is
the, this is the direction to, uh, to be
going, honing your pickup lines. I mean, if you
enjoy that, again, go forward. But, but if you
don't, there are other ways.
Yeah, I just think that the pickup lines and
the pickup artist kind of approach is very or
tends to be very unsuccessful, and then what might
happen is that you, it might get very discouraged.
So
yeah, I think, I think. Um, OR a lot
of people, it's gonna make them, it's gonna make
them, um, more angry, and it's not, uh, it's,
it, it really is not the way we historically
have, have spent time with people is by, uh,
hitting on them randomly at bars.
Yeah, and then I guess that if you get
rejected 1000 times, which is, I mean, it's, it's
very likely because you're basically approaching strangers on the
street, then you go back home and you watch
manosphere content and you're like, yeah, they're right. I
mean women are all the same,
right, right, like it's one thing. Like I don't
want people to be like super afraid of rejection.
I think you can be too afraid of rejection,
and then you, you don't even go out at
all. But I don't exactly want people getting inured
to rejection either. Rejection is sometimes a healthy signal
that there's something that you could be doing differently.
So I think intentionally putting yourself in a situation
where it's like, all right, I'm gonna get rejected
999 times for that one success. I don't, yeah,
this is, this is, um, it feels, it feels
like you're moneyballing something that doesn't need to be
moneyballed.
Yeah. OK, great. So Dr. Eastwick, the book is
again Bonded by Evolution The New Science of Love
and Connection, and of course I will be also
leaving a link to our first interview about it
in the description. And just before we go, tell
us again where people can find you and your
work on the internet.
Um, YEAH, you can find me online. I am
the co-host of the Love Factory podcast with Eli
Finkel. We talk about relationship science and evolutionary psychology
in rom-coms and romantic films, and you can also
follow me on Instagram at Paul Eastwick.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
a great pleasure to talk with you and it's
been fun.
Yeah, you bet. Thanks so much for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlimon, Negro Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.